[DESIGN DOC] Documentation for Secrets Encryption (#6026)
noobaa/noobaa-core: docs/design/SecretsEncryption.md

# Encryption Master Keys

## OVERVIEW

> Previously, all sensitive data (cloud pool credentials, chunk cipher keys, account sync credentials, etc.) was stored plain and un-encrypted in the DB. This poses a security threat in which accessing the PVC of mongo would allow access to all the secrets and through that the data on the system and access to the cloud services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, all sensitive data (cloud pool credentials, chunk cipher keys, account sync credentials, etc.) was stored plain and un-encrypted in the DB. This poses a security threat, in which accessing the PVC of mongo would allow access to all the secrets and through that the data on the system and access to the cloud services.
```

 * Key rotation policies:
    * On demand - API request to rotate all keys or a specific scope (root/system/account/bucket).
    * Master keys expiry policy - set a system wide policy to expire and rotate keys automatically.
    * Chunk keys expiry policy - set a bucket/system policy to expire the chunk cipher keys which will re-generate cipher keys and re-encrypt the chunks data on the background.

## OUT OF SCOPE
Integration with external HSM or KMS is out of scope for this delivery. Using a single system-master-key would provide us an easy interface to add it later on since we would need to worry only about our top level master key.

## SOLUTION

### Hierarchy master keys tree
The following diagram illustrates a simple key hierarchy and its relationship to NooBaa entities data.
<div id="top" />
<img src="/docs/design/images/master_keys_diagram.png" />
In the figure, “Chunk” and “Account” schemas have the data we ultimately want to protect, such as chunk cipher keys, cipher iv, access keys, etc. For these scenarios, symmetric key encryption (where the same key is used both to encrypt and decrypt the data) is the norm, because it’s efficient.

> The application encrypts the sensitive data using the desired master key, the desired master key itself encrypted by his master key and so on recursively.

Reviewer: add punctuation after the word key:
```suggestion
The application encrypts the sensitive data using the desired master key, the desired master key itself encrypted by his master key, and so on recursively.
```

When the application wants to decrypt the sensitive data, it fetches the master key and uses it to decrypt the sensitive data.

Keys tree is stored encrypted in the DB memory (on disk memory), and stored decrypted at run-time (on process memory) for performance.
Structure of master key document in master keys collection:

```
required: [
       '_id',
   ],
   properties: {
       _id: { objectid: true },
       description: { type: 'string' },
       // If missing - encrypted with "global" key
       // 1. ENV - Mounted key from Kubernetes secret
       // 2. HSM configuration TBD - Get key from Vault
       master_key_id: { objectid: true },
       // cipher used to provide confidentiality - computed on the compressed data
       cipher_type: { $ref: 'common_api#/definitions/cipher_type' },
       cipher_key: { binary: true },
       cipher_iv: { binary: true },
       enabled: { type: 'boolean' }
   }
```

Notice that each cipher_key and cipher_iv is stored encrypted in DB memory and stored decrypted in process runtime memory (present different values depending on memory location).

> These documents are stored in the system store’s cache, and there is no need to create any transactions to the DB in order to get them (in memory operations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These documents are stored in the system store’s cache, and there is no need to create any transactions to the DB in order for getting them (in memory operations).
```

### Decryption of master keys at runtime
The master key hierarchy is decrypted at the system store’s initial load and stored in memory for efficient runtime encryption and decryption of sensitive data.

> This means that in order to decrypt sensitive data with a master key we do not need to waste compute time decrypting the master key with its master key and so on recursively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that for decrypting sensitive data with a master key we do not need to waste compute time decrypting the master key with its master key and so on recursively.
```

### Global master key
The “root” or “global” master key that does not have a master key id in its document is assumed to be stored and retrieved from an external HSM or mounted environment from a Kubernetes managed secret.

> The system store resolves and retrieves it on initial load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system store resolves and retrieves it on the initial load.
```

### Disabling/Rotating master key
Master keys are not deleted upon rotation/disabling.

This is due to the asynchronous process of propagation and re-encryption of data (mainly chunks) that was encrypted with the master key that was rotated/disabled.
The rebuild process happens in the background and is eventually consistent.
The rotated/disabled master key will be used to decrypt the data until it (data) gets re-encrypted with the new/different master key.

Data that can be re-encrypted easily will get the propagation of a new/different master key immediately (account access keys etc...), other types of data (chunk ciphers) will be re-encrypted in the background or upon demand (reads).

Chunks schema indicates the master key that it is encrypted with but it doesn’t indicate the current master key that it needs to be encrypted with. The master key that needs to encrypt the chunk should be taken from the account that is managing the bucket that the chunk was uploaded to.
This is why in addition to the background worker that will re-encrypt the needed chunks with new master keys, the system also checks the re-encryption on reads and triggers re-encryption.

> Notice that rotation/disabling of master keys is a potentially long operation that takes up compute time and data transfer bandwidth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that rotating/disabling master keys is a potentially long operation that takes up compute time and data transfer bandwidth.
```

### Sensitive string in memory

> Master keys will be wrapped by sensitive string in memory, which will obfuscate them from logs or any exports of the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Master keys will be wrapped by a sensitive string in memory, which will obfuscate them from logs or any exports of the system.
```

### Integrating with System Store

> System Store will resolve (decrypt) all of the master keys at load and cache them in process memory as sensitive strings under the Collections of the System Store, and will be accessible by their ids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
System Store will resolve (decrypt) all of the master keys at load and cache them in process memory as sensitive strings under the Collections of the System Store and will be accessible by their ids.
```

Reads of encrypted data by master keys will be decrypted at run-time (lazy load on demand).

> Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections will be saved un-encrypted but protected by a sensitive string in cache and undergo encryption prior to saving them to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections will be saved un-encrypted but protected by a sensitive string in cache and undergo encryption before saving them to the database.
```

> Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections will be saved un-encrypted but protected by a sensitive string in cache and undergo encryption before saving them to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections will be saved un-encrypted but protected by a sensitive string in the cache and undergo encryption before saving them to the database.
```

### Integrating with MD Store

> Similar to System Store integration, but we do not have cache for MD Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to System Store integration, but we do not have a cache for MD Store.
```

> This means that the decryption will of chunk ciphers will happen at run-time on reads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the decryption will of chunk ciphers happen at run-time on reads.
```

Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections (currently chunks) will undergo encryption prior to saving them to the database.

> Note that all master keys will be decrypted and saved as sensitive string in cache (System Store master keys collection), and decryption/encryption on reads and writes won’t require a recursive resolvement of master keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that all master keys will be decrypted and saved as a sensitive string in cache (System Store master keys collection), and decryption/encryption on reads and writes won’t require a recursive resolvement of master keys.
```

> Note that all master keys will be decrypted and saved as a sensitive string in cache (System Store master keys collection), and decryption/encryption on reads and writes won’t require a recursive resolvement of master keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that all master keys will be decrypted and saved as a sensitive string in the cache (System Store master keys collection), and decryption/encryption on reads and writes won’t require a recursive resolvement of master keys.
```

## OUT OF SCOPE
Integration with external HSM or KMS is out of scope for this delivery. Using a single system-master-key would provide us an easy interface to add it later on since we would need to worry only about our top level master key.

## SOLUTION

### Hierarchy master keys tree
The following diagram illustrates a simple key hierarchy and its relationship to NooBaa entities data.
<div id="top" />
<img src="/docs/design/images/master_keys_diagram.png" />
In the figure, “Chunk” and “Account” schemas have the data we ultimately want to protect, such as chunk cipher keys, cipher iv, access keys, etc. For these scenarios, symmetric key encryption (where the same key is used both to encrypt and decrypt the data) is the norm, because it’s efficient.

The application encrypts the sensitive data using the desired master key, the desired master key itself encrypted by his master key, and so on recursively.

When the application wants to decrypt the sensitive data, it fetches the master key and uses it to decrypt the sensitive data.

> Keys tree is stored encrypted in the DB memory (on disk memory), and stored decrypted at run-time (on process memory) for performance.

Reviewer 2: Since the next section describes how we decrypt keys in memory (and we discuss lazy) we don't want to have two different descriptions of it

Structure of master key document in master keys collection:

```
required: [
       '_id',
   ],
   properties: {
       _id: { objectid: true },
       description: { type: 'string' },
       // If missing - encrypted with "global" key
       // 1. ENV - Mounted key from Kubernetes secret
       // 2. HSM configuration TBD - Get key from Vault
       master_key_id: { objectid: true },
       // cipher used to provide confidentiality - computed on the compressed data
       cipher_type: { $ref: 'common_api#/definitions/cipher_type' },
       cipher_key: { binary: true },
       cipher_iv: { binary: true },
       enabled: { type: 'boolean' }
   }
```

Notice that each cipher_key and cipher_iv is stored encrypted in DB memory and stored decrypted in process runtime memory (present different values depending on memory location).
These documents are stored in the system store’s cache, and there is no need to create any transactions to the DB in order for getting them (in memory operations).

### Decryption of master keys at runtime

> The master key hierarchy is decrypted at the system store’s initial load and stored in memory for efficient runtime encryption and decryption of sensitive data.

Reviewer 2: We talked about it that we don't want every system_store reload to re-decrypt all keys which is wasteful assuming most keys are not used, so we want it lazy.

Some thoughts:
- Lazy means recursive, but with only two levels of master-keys tree in the system store recursion is not worrysome.
- I think it can be a simple SystemStoreData method, say `get_decrypted_master_key(key_id)`, that checks and returns cached value or otherwise recurse to get master's decrypted key +  decrypt the current key + cache it.
- We can cache it on the same object with a `Symbol('decrypted_master_key')`, or just a `_decrypted_master_key`, or even go as far as having an in memory LRUCache that maps between `cipher_key_b64 => decrypted_cipher_key_b64` so that decryption will be reserved for next reload too.

The system store resolves and retrieves it on initial load.

### Disabling/Rotating master key
Master keys are not deleted upon rotation/disabling.
This is due to the asynchronous process of propagation and re-encryption of data (mainly chunks) that was encrypted with the master key that was rotated/disabled.
The rebuild process happens in the background and is eventually consistent.
The rotated/disabled master key will be used to decrypt the data until it (data) gets re-encrypted with the new/different master key.
Data that can be re-encrypted easily will get the propagation of a new/different master key immediately (account access keys etc...), other types of data (chunk ciphers) will be re-encrypted in the background or upon demand (reads).
Chunks schema indicates the master key that it is encrypted with but it doesn’t indicate the current master key that it needs to be encrypted with. The master key that needs to encrypt the chunk should be taken from the account that is managing the bucket that the chunk was uploaded to.

> This is why in addition to the background worker that will re-encrypt the needed chunks with new master keys, the system also checks the re-encryption on reads and triggers re-encryption.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is why in addition to the background worker that will re-encrypt the needed chunks with new master keys, the system also checks the re-encryption on reads and triggers re-encryption.<br/>
```

Notice that rotation/disabling of master keys is a potentially long operation that takes up compute time and data transfer bandwidth.

### Sensitive string in memory
Master keys will be wrapped by sensitive string in memory, which will obfuscate them from logs or any exports of the system.

### Integrating with System Store

> System Store will resolve (decrypt) all of the master keys at load and cache them in process memory as sensitive strings under the Collections of the System Store, and will be accessible by their ids.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
System Store will resolve (decrypt) all of the master keys at load and cache them in process memory as sensitive strings under the Collections of the System Store, and will be accessible by their ids.<br/>
```

> Reads of encrypted data by master keys will be decrypted at run-time (lazy load on demand).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reads of encrypted data by master keys will be decrypted at run-time (lazy load on demand).<br/>
```

Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections will be saved un-encrypted but protected by a sensitive string in cache and undergo encryption prior to saving them to the database.

### Integrating with MD Store
Similar to System Store integration, but we do not have cache for MD Store.

> This means that the decryption will of chunk ciphers will happen at run-time on reads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that the decryption will of chunk ciphers will happen at run-time on reads.<br/>
```

> Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections (currently chunks) will undergo encryption prior to saving them to the database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Updates and creation of existing/new documents of collections (currently chunks) will undergo encryption prior to saving them to the database.<br/>
```

These documents are stored in the system store’s cache, and there is no need to create any transactions to the DB in order to get them (in memory operations).

### Decryption of master keys at runtime
The master key hierarchy is decrypted at the system store’s initial load and stored in memory for efficient runtime encryption and decryption of sensitive data.
This means that in order to decrypt sensitive data with a master key we do not need to waste compute time decrypting the master key with its master key and so on recursively.

### Global master key
The “root” or “global” master key that does not have a master key id in its document is assumed to be stored and retrieved from an external HSM or mounted environment from a Kubernetes managed secret.
The system store resolves and retrieves it on initial load.

### Disabling/Rotating master key
Master keys are not deleted upon rotation/disabling.
This is due to the asynchronous process of propagation and re-encryption of data (mainly chunks) that was encrypted with the master key that was rotated/disabled.
The rebuild process happens in the background and is eventually consistent.

> The rotated/disabled master key will be used to decrypt the data until it (data) gets re-encrypted with the new/different master key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The rotated/disabled master key will be used to decrypt the data until it (data) gets re-encrypted with the new/different master key.<br/>
```

> Data that can be re-encrypted easily will get the propagation of a new/different master key immediately (account access keys etc...), other types of data (chunk ciphers) will be re-encrypted in the background or upon demand (reads).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data that can be re-encrypted easily will get the propagation of a new/different master key immediately (account access keys etc...), other types of data (chunk ciphers) will be re-encrypted in the background or upon demand (reads).<br/>
```
